---
layout: page
title:  "HCI4D Research and Practice"
date:   2023-02-01 20:29:22 +0000
category: blog
image: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/0/04/Facebook_App_on_Mobile_Phone_%2846848249812%29.jpg
---

Technology is widely regarded as a driving force behind the economic growth of the Global South. In countries like India, with a thriving technology industry and consumer base, the impact of technology on social and economic transformation has been significant. Historically, Human-Computer Interaction for Development (HCI4D) has focused on specific regions, particularly Asia and Africa. This highlights the need to expand its geographical reach within the Global South, including under-resourced communities in North America and Europe [[1]](#1-reference).

The challenges HCI4D aims to tackle are well-aligned with the United Nation’s framework for sustainable development [[3]](#3-reference). The definition of development can take various forms depending on the historical context and the discipline defining it. From an economic perspective, its meaning has evolved from pure growth of gross domestic product (GDP) to “a process of expanding the real freedoms that people enjoy”[[5]](#5-reference). As explained by Amartya Sen, “development requires the removal of major sources of unfreedom: poverty as well as tyranny, poor economic opportunities as well as systematic social deprivation, neglect of public facilities as well as intolerance or overactivity of repressive states” [[5]](#5-reference). This demands that HCI4D research and practice focus on outputs and outcomes. After all, many consider HCI4D to be “for development outputs as much as it is for development outcomes” [[1]](#1-reference). In my view, HCI4D research should explore questions about the intended and unintended effects that a particular technology can have on the lives of its users. This includes examining how a specific product or service has contributed to users’ well-being or harm in the short and long term. Additionally, it would be interesting to investigate how the adoption of a particular technology may contribute to expanding users’ freedoms.

In the last couple of decades, HCI4D researchers and practitioners have made substantial contributions to application domains such as education, access and health [[1]](#1-reference). The progress observed in the access domain, particularly in Asia, has been unprecedented. Dell et al. noted how widespread access to low-cost mobile computing has inspired researchers to shift their focus from creating specialized hardware “designed specifically for low-resource settings, such as the One Laptop per Child project” to an increased emphasis on the socio-technical transformations of mobile computing [[1]](#1-reference).

Furthermore, the outcomes that may arise from the implementation of IT and HCI interventions in under-served and under-resourced contexts can only be revealed through conducting qualitative research. This research should not only focus on system usability or efficiency but also explore the impact of certain technology on users' social and economic contexts. In my opinion, qualitative research enables a context-aware evaluation of technology. Kumar [[6]](#6-reference) has contributed to HCI4D research literature through ethnographic and qualitative inquiries in India. By observing the “leisure-driven engagement with new media, […], and the development-friendly outcomes that result from it” [[6]](#6-reference), they have revealed how users integrate new technologies into their lives and how these technologies motivate behavioral changes in various aspects.

They also highlight the unexpected tensions that may arise between the social values embedded in technology, such as the social media platform Facebook (FB), and the social values of the environment in which it operates. Through contextual inquiry and unstructured interviews, Kumar discovers how FB contributes to “generating, fulfilling, sustaining, and raising” users’ aspirations [[6]](#6-reference).

**References**

1. <a id='1-reference'></a>Nicola Dell and Neha Kumar. 2016. The Ins and Outs of HCI for Development. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI' 16). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2220–2232. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858081](https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858081)
2. <a id='2-reference'></a>United Nations. 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. [https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/291/89/PDF/N1529189.pdf?OpenElement](https://documents-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N15/291/89/PDF/N1529189.pdf?OpenElement)
3. <a id='3-reference'></a>Eric Brewer, Michael Demmer, Bowei Du, Melissa Ho, Matthew Kam, Sergiu Nedevschi, Joyojeet Pal, Rabin Patra, Sonesh Surana, and Kevin Fall. (2005). The case for technology in developing regions. Computer, 38(6), 25-38. DOI: [https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2005.204](https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2005.204)
4. <a id='4-reference'></a>Neha Kumar, MarisolWong-Villacres, Naveena Karusala, Aditya Vishwanath, Arkadeep Kumar, and Azra Ismail. 2019. Aspirations-Based Design. In The Tenth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development (ICTD' 19), January 4–7, 2019, Ahmedabad, India. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3287098.3287117](https://doi.org/10.1145/3287098.3287117)
5. <a id='5-reference'></a>Sen, Amartya. 1999. Development as freedom. Random House, Inc., New York, NY.
6. <a id='6-reference'></a>Kumar, Neha. 2014. Facebook for self-empowerment? A study of Facebook adoption in urban India. New Media & Society. Vol. 16(7) 1122–1137. DOI: [10.1177/1461444814543999](10.1177/1461444814543999)